---
layout: post
title: "Neat VLC extension to download subtitles"
tags: [vlc, video, subtitles, extensions, lua]
author_name: Emanuele Rocca
author_uri: http://twitter.com/emarocca
---

As somebody who often watches movies and tv shows I recurringly have the problem of finding the right English subtitles for the video I am about to enjoy. Now, that is really a tedious thing to do. You have to go on a website such as "opensubtitles.org":http://www.opensubtitles.org/en and type the title of what you are looking for. Then you usually have to choose from a pletheora of results, download the archive, unzip it, fire up VLC, go to Video -> Subtitles Track -> Open File, and finally open your subtitles file. And what you tipically find out at that point is that the subtitles are completely out of sync with the audio, but rather than doing the whole process again you prefer to just sync them with a bit of VLC-fu. Which always takes longer than you thought, but hey. 

Now, what if there was an extremly simple way to automagically choose the subtitles for a given movie *directly from VLC*?

The good news is that somebody wrote a beautiful VLC extension that does exactly that. He also wrote a "introductory article about VLC extensions":http://jpeg.dinauz.org/blog/index.php?post/2010/01/30/Extensions-in-VLC. Thank you, Jean-Philippe André. 

On a Linux box, installing the extension is as simple as creating the VLC extensions folder (mkdir -p ~/.local/share/vlc/lua/extensions/) and putting "the subtitles extension":https://raw.github.com/gist/1188492/a058a8d19cf3bd1849aa687883f4fb3b78e0de9e/141787-subtitles-mod.lua in it.
